content/collections/posts/2025-04-22.keystatic-x-astro.md, before:

---
id: 525d748d-84c4-4a4a-8da3-5def99292733
blueprint: posts
title: 'Keystatic x Astro'
updated_by: 93b8e665-714e-481d-af67-5ac201e067ef
updated_at: 1745313743
author: 93b8e665-714e-481d-af67-5ac201e067ef
intro: "Time for the second part of my Headless CMS series - this time let's try out Keystatic."
thumbnail: arts/flotiq-cms-astro/keystatic.png
excerpt: "Using Astro with headless CMSs is a breeze. I will show you several examples of those CMSs in the upcoming weeks. We're starting with Flotiq. Let's dive in!"
tags:
  - cms
  - astro
og_image: arts/keystatic-x-astro/post-cover--twitter-(45).png
duplicated_from: 385c79d3-4366-4492-9f28-f3ea1a2b5ec6
content:
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 2
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'What is Keystatic'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: link
            attrs:
              href: 'https://keystatic.com/'
              rel: null
              target: null
              title: null
        text: Keystatic
      -
        type: text
        text: ' is one of those CMSs I promised myself to try for years, but I never did. And you know what? It was a huge mistake. From an unknown CMS, Keystatic became one of the top candidates to use in some upcoming projects. '
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Unlike '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: link
            attrs:
              href: 'statamic://entry::385c79d3-4366-4492-9f28-f3ea1a2b5ec6'
              rel: 'noopener noreferrer'
              target: _blank
              title: null
        text: Flotiq
      -
        type: text
        text: ', Keystatic is:'
  -
    type: bulletList
    content:
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: Self-hosted
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'It creates MD/MDX/JSON/YAML files'
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: "It's totally free (there is Keystatic cloud, too, with a premium version)"
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'You just need to add it to your Astro project (later on this below) and start writing.'
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 3
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'What do I enjoy about it?'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: bold
        text: Keystatic
      -
        type: text
        text: ' is very minimalistic. Personally, I like it - it lets you focus on writing instead of getting constantly distracted. '
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'There are a few things that I enjoyed a lot:'
  -
    type: bulletList
    content:
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: "The fact that it's a laser-focused CMS - it's not perfect for everything, but it's perfect in some specific situations"
  -
    type: bulletList
    content:
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                marks:
                  -
                    type: code
                text: entryLayout
              -
                type: text
                text: " option - it lets you select which field is the main content field and automatically moves the rest of the content into a sidebar. It's one of those small things that change a lot"
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'a lot of field types - I especially enjoyed '
              -
                type: text
                marks:
                  -
                    type: code
                text: blocks
              -
                type: text
                text: ' and '
              -
                type: text
                marks:
                  -
                    type: code
                text: repeater
              -
                type: text
                text: ' types. Also, the slug field works very well.'
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'conditional field types'
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 3
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'What could be done better?'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "When I was working with this simple demo, I was only able to find one problem - I still don't know how to get the update time to update on each save."
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "Does it mean that Keystatic is perfect? Not exactly - it means that by using Keystatic, you agree to some limitations. And it's a good thing until you realize you hit this limitation. "
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 2
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: Installation
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'First, we need to install Astro as usual. I will be using the default blog template.'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "When you're done, it's time to add Keystatic to the equation. To do so, just follow "
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: link
            attrs:
              href: 'https://keystatic.com/docs/installation-astro'
              rel: 'noopener noreferrer'
              target: _blank
              title: null
        text: 'those steps'
      -
        type: text
        text: '. Use the '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: keystatic.config.ts
      -
        type: text
        text: ' just to make sure everything is working. '
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "In this tutorial, we'll use "
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: bold
        text: 'Markdoc '
      -
        type: text
        text: 'instead of Markdown or MDX. Why? Because why not? Markdoc works perfectly fine with '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: bold
        text: Astro.
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 2
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Updating the keystatic config file'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'We want our blog to look like this:'
  -
    type: bulletList
    content:
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: title
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'description - which is an intro'
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'content '
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'publication date'
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'hero image'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "To achieve this, let's create the first version of our "
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: keystatic.config.ts
  -
    type: codeBlock
    attrs:
      language: null
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: |-
          // keystatic.config.ts
          import { config, fields, collection } from '@keystatic/core';

          export default config({
            storage: {
              kind: 'local',
            },
            collections: {
              blog: collection({
                label: 'Blog',
                slugField: 'title',
                path: 'src/content/blog/*',
                schema: {
                  title: fields.slug({ name: { label: 'Title' } }),
                  description: fields.text({
                      label: 'Description',
                      multiline: true
                  }),
                  pubDate: fields.datetime(
                      { 
                          label: 'Publication Date', 
                          defaultValue: { kind: "now" },
                          format: 'YYYY-MM-DD HH:mm:ss',
                      },
                  ),
                  heroImage: fields.image({
                      label: 'Hero Image',
                      description: 'The image that will be displayed at the top of the blog post.',
                  }),
                  content: fields.markdoc({ 
                      label: 'Content',
                  }),
                },
              }),
            },
          });
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Now, run '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: 'npm run dev'
      -
        type: text
        text: ' and visit the '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: 'localhost:4321/keystatic'
      -
        type: text
        text: '. You should see something like this'
  -
    type: set
    attrs:
      id: m9rlw4mi
      values:
        type: image
        image_source: arts/flotiq-cms-astro-1/zrzut-ekranu-2025-04-21-234614.png
        width: wide
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "It's OK, but before pushing forward, let's fix a few things:"
  -
    type: bulletList
    content:
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'Images are saved in the wrong folder'
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'We can make it look nicer'
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'The post listing could have more fields shown'
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 3
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: Images
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'There is a '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: link
            attrs:
              href: 'https://keystatic.com/docs/recipes/astro-images'
              rel: null
              target: null
              title: null
        text: guide
      -
        type: text
        text: ' in the Keystatic docs that explains it better. But overall, it comes down to upgrading the '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: .tsconfig.json
      -
        type: text
        text: ' file a bit:'
  -
    type: codeBlock
    attrs:
      language: null
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: |-
          {
            "compilerOptions": {
              "baseUrl": ".",
              "paths": {
                "@assets/*": ["./src/assets/*"],
              },
            }
          }
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'and updating the '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: keystatic.confg.ts
      -
        type: text
        text: ' file:'
  -
    type: codeBlock
    attrs:
      language: null
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: |-
          heroImage: fields.image({
              label: 'Hero Image',
              description: 'The image that will be displayed at the top of the blog post.',
              directory: 'src/assets/images/blog',
              publicPath: '@assets/images/blog/'
          }),
          content: fields.markdoc({ 
              label: 'Content',
              options: {
                  image: {
                      directory: 'src/assets/images/blog',
                      publicPath: '@assets/images/blog/'
                  }
              },
          }),
  -
    type: paragraph
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 3
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Nicer look'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'By default, Keystatic is using the '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: 'entryLayout: form'
      -
        type: text
        text: ' option. It results in having all your fields stacked on top of each other. But our page is a blog, so we want our content fields to be the most important one.'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'To do so, we need to apply a small change:'
  -
    type: codeBlock
    attrs:
      language: null
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: |-
          entryLayout: 'content',
          format: {
            contentField: 'content',
          },
  -
    type: set
    attrs:
      id: m9sa9rp5
      values:
        type: image
        image_source: arts/keystatic-x-astro/zrzut-ekranu-2025-04-22-110857.png
        width: wide
  -
    type: paragraph
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 3
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Showing additional columns'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "Right now, when we're viewing all the posts, we can only see the post slug. I would like to see the full title and the publication date, too. To add this, we just need to add this line:"
  -
    type: codeBlock
    attrs:
      language: null
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "columns: ['title', 'pubDate'], "
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 2
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Connecting to Astro'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "As I mentioned, we will use the default Astro Blog template. While it's not robust and full of features, it's perfect for our example."
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "Because Keystatic will save the new files inside Astro's content folder, there's not much to do. Still, we're going to update the "
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: content.config.ts
      -
        type: text
        text: ' file a bit:'
  -
    type: codeBlock
    attrs:
      language: null
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: |
          import { glob } from 'astro/loaders';
          import { defineCollection, z } from 'astro:content';

          const blog = defineCollection({
          	loader: glob({ base: './src/content/blog', pattern: '**/*.mdoc' }),
          	schema: ({ image }) => z.object({
          		title: z.string(),
          		description: z.string(),
          		pubDate: z.coerce.date(),
          		heroImage: image().optional(),
          	}),
          });

          export const collections = { blog };
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'I removed the updateDate field and converted '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: heroImage
      -
        type: text
        text: ' to an image type instead of a string.'
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 3
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: Images
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "The default Astro Blog theme handles images in a rather simple way - it just shows the images as they are by passing the URL. And while it works, we can(and should) do better. That's why we'll use the "
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: '<Image />'
      -
        type: text
        text: ' component to optimize the images.'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'We just need to edit '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: BlogPost.astro
      -
        type: text
        text: ' component and '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: index.astro
      -
        type: text
        text: ' page. In both cases, you need to add:'
  -
    type: codeBlock
    attrs:
      language: null
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "import { Image } from 'astro:assets';"
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'in the frontmatter part and replacing the '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: '<img src...'
      -
        type: text
        text: ' with '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: '<Image src...'
      -
        type: text
        text: ' (rest of parameters stay the same).'
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 3
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Showing the data'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Because we already updated the '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: content.config.ts
      -
        type: text
        text: ' file, and the blog template already uses '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: getCollection()
      -
        type: text
        text: " we don't have to change anything. It will work out of the box."
  -
    type: set
    attrs:
      id: m9s9ys68
      values:
        type: image
        image_source: arts/keystatic-x-astro/zrzut-ekranu-2025-04-22-110031.png
        width: wide
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 2
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: Summary
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Because of how Keystatic works, using files, connecting it with Astro is very simple. You still use Astro as usual, the only difference is that you edit content files in a different way.'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "In this tutorial, we just touched the tip of the iceberg of what Keystatic can do. Don't hesitate to give all other features a try."
---

Commit message:

Update excerpt and timestamp in Keystatic x Astro post

content/collections/posts/2025-04-22.keystatic-x-astro.md, after:

---
id: 525d748d-84c4-4a4a-8da3-5def99292733
blueprint: posts
title: 'Keystatic x Astro'
updated_by: 93b8e665-714e-481d-af67-5ac201e067ef
updated_at: 1745535535
author: 93b8e665-714e-481d-af67-5ac201e067ef
intro: "Time for the second part of my Headless CMS series - this time let's try out Keystatic."
thumbnail: arts/flotiq-cms-astro/keystatic.png
excerpt: "Time for the second part of my Headless CMS series - this time, let's try out Keystatic."
tags:
  - cms
  - astro
og_image: arts/keystatic-x-astro/post-cover--twitter-(45).png
duplicated_from: 385c79d3-4366-4492-9f28-f3ea1a2b5ec6
content:
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 2
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'What is Keystatic'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: link
            attrs:
              href: 'https://keystatic.com/'
              rel: null
              target: null
              title: null
        text: Keystatic
      -
        type: text
        text: ' is one of those CMSs I promised myself to try for years, but I never did. And you know what? It was a huge mistake. From an unknown CMS, Keystatic became one of the top candidates to use in some upcoming projects. '
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Unlike '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: link
            attrs:
              href: 'statamic://entry::385c79d3-4366-4492-9f28-f3ea1a2b5ec6'
              rel: 'noopener noreferrer'
              target: _blank
              title: null
        text: Flotiq
      -
        type: text
        text: ', Keystatic is:'
  -
    type: bulletList
    content:
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: Self-hosted
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'It creates MD/MDX/JSON/YAML files'
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: "It's totally free (there is Keystatic cloud, too, with a premium version)"
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'You just need to add it to your Astro project (later on this below) and start writing.'
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 3
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'What do I enjoy about it?'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: bold
        text: Keystatic
      -
        type: text
        text: ' is very minimalistic. Personally, I like it - it lets you focus on writing instead of getting constantly distracted. '
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'There are a few things that I enjoyed a lot:'
  -
    type: bulletList
    content:
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: "The fact that it's a laser-focused CMS - it's not perfect for everything, but it's perfect in some specific situations"
  -
    type: bulletList
    content:
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                marks:
                  -
                    type: code
                text: entryLayout
              -
                type: text
                text: " option - it lets you select which field is the main content field and automatically moves the rest of the content into a sidebar. It's one of those small things that change a lot"
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'a lot of field types - I especially enjoyed '
              -
                type: text
                marks:
                  -
                    type: code
                text: blocks
              -
                type: text
                text: ' and '
              -
                type: text
                marks:
                  -
                    type: code
                text: repeater
              -
                type: text
                text: ' types. Also, the slug field works very well.'
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'conditional field types'
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 3
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'What could be done better?'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "When I was working with this simple demo, I was only able to find one problem - I still don't know how to get the update time to update on each save."
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "Does it mean that Keystatic is perfect? Not exactly - it means that by using Keystatic, you agree to some limitations. And it's a good thing until you realize you hit this limitation. "
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 2
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: Installation
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'First, we need to install Astro as usual. I will be using the default blog template.'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "When you're done, it's time to add Keystatic to the equation. To do so, just follow "
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: link
            attrs:
              href: 'https://keystatic.com/docs/installation-astro'
              rel: 'noopener noreferrer'
              target: _blank
              title: null
        text: 'those steps'
      -
        type: text
        text: '. Use the '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: keystatic.config.ts
      -
        type: text
        text: ' just to make sure everything is working. '
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "In this tutorial, we'll use "
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: bold
        text: 'Markdoc '
      -
        type: text
        text: 'instead of Markdown or MDX. Why? Because why not? Markdoc works perfectly fine with '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: bold
        text: Astro.
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 2
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Updating the keystatic config file'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'We want our blog to look like this:'
  -
    type: bulletList
    content:
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: title
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'description - which is an intro'
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'content '
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'publication date'
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'hero image'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "To achieve this, let's create the first version of our "
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: keystatic.config.ts
  -
    type: codeBlock
    attrs:
      language: null
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: |-
          // keystatic.config.ts
          import { config, fields, collection } from '@keystatic/core';

          export default config({
            storage: {
              kind: 'local',
            },
            collections: {
              blog: collection({
                label: 'Blog',
                slugField: 'title',
                path: 'src/content/blog/*',
                schema: {
                  title: fields.slug({ name: { label: 'Title' } }),
                  description: fields.text({
                      label: 'Description',
                      multiline: true
                  }),
                  pubDate: fields.datetime(
                      { 
                          label: 'Publication Date', 
                          defaultValue: { kind: "now" },
                          format: 'YYYY-MM-DD HH:mm:ss',
                      },
                  ),
                  heroImage: fields.image({
                      label: 'Hero Image',
                      description: 'The image that will be displayed at the top of the blog post.',
                  }),
                  content: fields.markdoc({ 
                      label: 'Content',
                  }),
                },
              }),
            },
          });
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Now, run '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: 'npm run dev'
      -
        type: text
        text: ' and visit the '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: 'localhost:4321/keystatic'
      -
        type: text
        text: '. You should see something like this'
  -
    type: set
    attrs:
      id: m9rlw4mi
      values:
        type: image
        image_source: arts/flotiq-cms-astro-1/zrzut-ekranu-2025-04-21-234614.png
        width: wide
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "It's OK, but before pushing forward, let's fix a few things:"
  -
    type: bulletList
    content:
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'Images are saved in the wrong folder'
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'We can make it look nicer'
      -
        type: listItem
        content:
          -
            type: paragraph
            content:
              -
                type: text
                text: 'The post listing could have more fields shown'
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 3
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: Images
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'There is a '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: link
            attrs:
              href: 'https://keystatic.com/docs/recipes/astro-images'
              rel: null
              target: null
              title: null
        text: guide
      -
        type: text
        text: ' in the Keystatic docs that explains it better. But overall, it comes down to upgrading the '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: .tsconfig.json
      -
        type: text
        text: ' file a bit:'
  -
    type: codeBlock
    attrs:
      language: null
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: |-
          {
            "compilerOptions": {
              "baseUrl": ".",
              "paths": {
                "@assets/*": ["./src/assets/*"],
              },
            }
          }
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'and updating the '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: keystatic.confg.ts
      -
        type: text
        text: ' file:'
  -
    type: codeBlock
    attrs:
      language: null
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: |-
          heroImage: fields.image({
              label: 'Hero Image',
              description: 'The image that will be displayed at the top of the blog post.',
              directory: 'src/assets/images/blog',
              publicPath: '@assets/images/blog/'
          }),
          content: fields.markdoc({ 
              label: 'Content',
              options: {
                  image: {
                      directory: 'src/assets/images/blog',
                      publicPath: '@assets/images/blog/'
                  }
              },
          }),
  -
    type: paragraph
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 3
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Nicer look'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'By default, Keystatic is using the '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: 'entryLayout: form'
      -
        type: text
        text: ' option. It results in having all your fields stacked on top of each other. But our page is a blog, so we want our content fields to be the most important one.'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'To do so, we need to apply a small change:'
  -
    type: codeBlock
    attrs:
      language: null
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: |-
          entryLayout: 'content',
          format: {
            contentField: 'content',
          },
  -
    type: set
    attrs:
      id: m9sa9rp5
      values:
        type: image
        image_source: arts/keystatic-x-astro/zrzut-ekranu-2025-04-22-110857.png
        width: wide
  -
    type: paragraph
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 3
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Showing additional columns'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "Right now, when we're viewing all the posts, we can only see the post slug. I would like to see the full title and the publication date, too. To add this, we just need to add this line:"
  -
    type: codeBlock
    attrs:
      language: null
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "columns: ['title', 'pubDate'], "
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 2
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Connecting to Astro'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "As I mentioned, we will use the default Astro Blog template. While it's not robust and full of features, it's perfect for our example."
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "Because Keystatic will save the new files inside Astro's content folder, there's not much to do. Still, we're going to update the "
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: content.config.ts
      -
        type: text
        text: ' file a bit:'
  -
    type: codeBlock
    attrs:
      language: null
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: |
          import { glob } from 'astro/loaders';
          import { defineCollection, z } from 'astro:content';

          const blog = defineCollection({
          	loader: glob({ base: './src/content/blog', pattern: '**/*.mdoc' }),
          	schema: ({ image }) => z.object({
          		title: z.string(),
          		description: z.string(),
          		pubDate: z.coerce.date(),
          		heroImage: image().optional(),
          	}),
          });

          export const collections = { blog };
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'I removed the updateDate field and converted '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: heroImage
      -
        type: text
        text: ' to an image type instead of a string.'
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 3
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: Images
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "The default Astro Blog theme handles images in a rather simple way - it just shows the images as they are by passing the URL. And while it works, we can(and should) do better. That's why we'll use the "
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: '<Image />'
      -
        type: text
        text: ' component to optimize the images.'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'We just need to edit '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: BlogPost.astro
      -
        type: text
        text: ' component and '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: index.astro
      -
        type: text
        text: ' page. In both cases, you need to add:'
  -
    type: codeBlock
    attrs:
      language: null
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "import { Image } from 'astro:assets';"
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'in the frontmatter part and replacing the '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: '<img src...'
      -
        type: text
        text: ' with '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: '<Image src...'
      -
        type: text
        text: ' (rest of parameters stay the same).'
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 3
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Showing the data'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Because we already updated the '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: content.config.ts
      -
        type: text
        text: ' file, and the blog template already uses '
      -
        type: text
        marks:
          -
            type: code
        text: getCollection()
      -
        type: text
        text: " we don't have to change anything. It will work out of the box."
  -
    type: set
    attrs:
      id: m9s9ys68
      values:
        type: image
        image_source: arts/keystatic-x-astro/zrzut-ekranu-2025-04-22-110031.png
        width: wide
  -
    type: heading
    attrs:
      level: 2
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: Summary
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: 'Because of how Keystatic works, using files, connecting it with Astro is very simple. You still use Astro as usual, the only difference is that you edit content files in a different way.'
  -
    type: paragraph
    content:
      -
        type: text
        text: "In this tutorial, we just touched the tip of the iceberg of what Keystatic can do. Don't hesitate to give all other features a try."
---
